# Thinking Through Things

## INTRODUCTION: Thinking Through Things

It remains a commonplace within anthropology and related disciplines that meanings can only be thought of as abstractions—ideas that somehow circulate in the ether, over a material substrate primordially devoid of significance. 'Understood as a realm of discourse, meaning and value', Tim Ingold has observed, 'culture is conceived to hover over the material world but not to permeate it' (2000: 340). On this model, meanings attach to things, impose themselves on things, may even be inscribed or embodied in certain things, but are always presumed to be—in the first instance—distinct from the things themselves. Marilyn Strathern (1990) has attributed this view to the epistemological preoccupations of a modernist anthropology that takes as its task the elucidation of social and cultural 'contexts, systems or frameworks used to make sense of social life (see also Pinney and Thomas 2001). In this scheme, she notes, the primary task of anthropologists is to slot things into the social and historical systems (such as 'society' or 'culture') wherein their significance is produced. One effect of this procedure is that the system itself becomes the object of study, its artefacts reduced to mere illustration:

> For if one sets up social context as the frame of reference in relation to which meanings are to be elucidated, [...] then explicating that frame of reference obviates or renders the illustrations superfluous: they are become exemplars or reflections of meanings which are produced elsewhere. It was in this sense that social anthropology could proceed independently of the study of material culture.
> (Strathern 1990: 38)¹

## Things as meanings

This volume is designed to test the limits of such enduring analytical assumptions. Rather than accepting that meanings are fundamentally separate from their material manifestations (signifier v. signified, word v. referent, etc.), the aim is to explore the consequences of an apparently counter-intuitive possibility: that things might be treated as *sui generis* meanings. Such a formulation will appear paradoxical only to those who see the anthropologist's task as one of putting things into context (which of course turns precisely on the distinctions we seek to overcome). So the starting-point instead is to treat meaning and thing as an identity—and if the Aristotelian notion of essence was meant to allow things to carry their definitive properties on their sleeve, then the essentialism entertained here is indeed radical. For in the image put forward, meanings are not 'carried' by things but just are identical to them. Such a starting-point neutralises the question of 'knowledge' at the outset, because meanings—be they native (relativism) or supra-cultural (universalism)—no longer need to be excavated, illuminated, decoded and interpreted. What is proposed, in effect, is an anthropology that holds issues of interpretation at bay. The point is not that anthropologists might be wrong (or indeed unique) in their predilection for structuring the world according to proverbial 'binary oppositions', but simply that such notions are not universally shared (even within 'the West'), and therefore may not be particularly useful as a lens through which to view other peoples' lives and ideas. Indeed, the strategy of refusing to apportion meanings and things separately—of taking them as one—provides a way out of such familiar anthropological dilemmas. For it focuses attention away from the business of adjudicating between competing 'theories' that may be more or less appropriate to ethnographic material, toward that of articulating a method by which the material may itself enunciate meanings.

## What things? / Thing-as-heuristic v. Thing-as-analytic

What things?