# 3. 各セクションの展開

## INTRODUCTION：物を通じて思考する

Some of the potential of 'thinking through things' has of course already been realised in the work of a number of authors responsible for what could be seen as something of a quiet revolution in anthropology. This shift has been relatively unselfconscious until recently, performed in the shadows of far more flamboyant theoretical gyrations which took place in the 1980s and 1990s under the banner of 'reflexivity'. Discrete enough to remain nameless, promulgated too loosely across otherwise divergent works to deserve the name of a movement, the tenets of the anthropology we have in mind can nevertheless be gleaned from the works of a number of influential anthropologists, including not only Bruno Latour, but also Alfred Gell, Marilyn Strathern, Eduardo Viveiros de Castro and Roy Wagner. We say 'gleaned' because, despite the impact that each of these authors is having individually, their collective message about a new way of thinking anthropologically is yet to be woven into a positive programme for future research (though for an explicit manifesto see Viveiros de Castro 2003, and for a more enigmatic one see Wagner 2001). Our project draws immediate inspiration from the ways in which this body of work has quietly, almost surreptitiously, radicalised the very aims of anthropological endeavour.

What these authors have in common is that their work points in varying degree toward the analytic advantages of shifting focus from questions of knowledge and epistemology toward those of ontology. What is exciting about such an approach is that, instead of just adapting or elaborating theoretical perspectives—often pillaged from other disciplines—to reconfigure the parameters of 'our' knowledge to suit informants' representations of reality, it opens the way for genuinely novel concepts to be produced out of the ethnographic encounter. The question then becomes not just how human phenomena may be illuminated (through structuralism!, no, semiotics!, no, phenomenology!, no, Marx showed the way!, etc.) but rather how the phenomena in question may themselves offer illumination. How, in other words, the ways in which people go about their lives may unsettle familiar assumptions, not least those that underlie anthropologists' particular repertories of theory.

## From epistemological angst to the ontological turn：認識論的不安から存在論的転回へ

It is precisely the difference between these two strategic alternatives that is captured by the distinction between epistemological and ontological orientations in anthropological analysis. Since these terms—'epistemology' and 'ontology'—are much used and abused in present day discourse, however, it is important to be quite explicit about what work we want them to do for our argument on 'things'. Perhaps the clearest statement of the distinction was given by Eduardo Viveiros de Castro in the last of four lectures delivered to the Department of Social Anthropology at Cambridge in 1998, when contributors to this volume were students (Viveiros de Castro 1998a). In closing the argument of the lectures, which concerned the radical alterity of Amerindian cosmology, Viveiros de Castro offered a diagnosis as to why, despite their professional investment in the task, anthropologists find such cases of alterity difficult to handle:

> [A]nthropology seems to believe that its paramount task is to explain how it comes to know (to represent) its object—an object also defined as knowledge (or representation). Is it possible to know it? Is it decent to know it? Do we really know it, or do we only see ourselves in a mirror?
>
> (Viveiros de Castro 1998a: 92)

Anthropologists' epistemological angst, for Viveiros de Castro, is a symptom of a deeper tendency in the history of modernist thought: the Cartesian rupture with medieval scholastics produced a radical simplification of our ontology, by positing only two principles or substances: unextended thought and extended matter. Such simplification is still with us. Modernity started with it: with the massive conversion of ontological into epistemological questions—that is, questions of representation—, a conversion prompted by the fact that every mode of being not assimilable to obdurate 'matter' had to be swallowed by 'thought'. The simplification of ontology accordingly led to an enormous complication of epistemology. After objects or things were pacified, retreating to an exterior, silent and uniform world of 'Nature', subjects began to proliferate and to chatter endlessly: transcendental Egos, legislative Understandings, philosophies of language, theories of mind, social representations, logic of the signifier, webs of signification, discursive practices, politics of knowledge—you name it.

(Ibid.)

The assumption, then, has always been that anthropology is an episteme—indeed, the episteme of others' epistemes, which we call cultures (cf. Wagner 1981; Strathern 1990). The inveteracy of this assumption, argued Viveiros de Castro, is owed to the fact that it is a direct corollary of 'our' ontology—the ontology of modern Euro-Americans, that is. It is because, in our Cartesian-Kantian bind, we assume that the manifold of the universe cannot but consist at most of mind or matter (representation or reality, culture or nature, meaning or thing) that we also cannot but assume that both anthropology and its object are epistemic in character. If we are all living in the same world—one best described and apprehended by science—then the task left to social scientists is to elucidate the various systemic formulations of knowledge (epistemologies) that offer different accounts of that one world. This just follows from the way the dualism of mind and matter apportions questions of difference and similarity. Matter is deemed 'indifferent' (our term) in the most literal sense: it qualifies as matter just to the extent that it instantiates universal laws. Things of the world may appear different, but the point is that they are different in similar—universal—ways; nature in this sense is 'one'. Culture, on the other hand, is 'many'. After all, while matter (nature) just is what it is indifferently, mind (culture) can represent it in different ways. So, to the extent that anthropology takes difference as its object, leaving the study of the indifferences of nature to natural scientists, it cannot but be a study of the different ways the world (the one world of Nature) is represented by different people—and particularly by different groups of people (Durkheim 1982: 40).

The circularity of this position is part of its remarkable power. For, like a Popperian 'closed system' (Popper 1995), it assimilates all dissent as confirmation—as grist to its mill. Were one merely to contemplate the possibility of a different ontology, one would be forced to capitulate immediately by recognising that such a possibility, by its very virtue of being 'different', cannot but be an alternative representation. Such is the power of the dualist ontology of difference: it exposes all possible adversaries—all putatively alternative ontologies—as merely different epistemological positions (artefacts of knowledge). Thus it compasses them within its own terms, much like old-styled Marxists used to do in debate with the bourgeoisie ('your critique of Marx's idea of false consciousness is just an example of it!'). In keeping with its monotheistic origins (Viveiros de Castro 1998a: 91), ours is an ontology of one ontology. If 'ontology' simply means the study of the nature of reality, then to speak of multiple ontologies seems an oxymoron at best, or a sign of social pathology and schizophrenia at worst. In any event, the proponents of 'multiple ontologies' can be dismissed as simply promoting a fractured and deliberately incoherent rendering of the 'real world' that (we all know, so the argument goes) is 'out there'—a utopian and polyvocal epistemology emitting from a confused mind which mistakes multiple representations of the world for multiple worlds. What an impasse.

Indeed, the risk of seeking to conceptualise anthropological concerns in ontological terms is precisely that of falling prey to the monomania of 'one ontology'. One of the reasons for which appeals to ontology are often treated with suspicion is surely the ease with which this term can descend into synonymy with 'culture'. Rhetorical gestures towards a vague idea that culture has something to do with 'being' are a dualist bugbear. They simply confirm the supposition that differences—as to 'being' or otherwise—are a matter of cultural perspective—perspective, that is, on 'the world'.