# Introduction: Thinking Through Things

## INTRODUCTION：物を通じて思考する

The way out of anthropology's epistemological bind turns on a denial of the key axiom of dualist ontology, namely that difference has to be to similarity what representation is to the world. For if one refuses to attribute difference to culture and similarity to nature, the circular coercion of dualism is rendered limp. In the scheme advanced here, therefore, the presumption of natural unity and cultural difference — epitomised in the anthropos — is no longer tenable (cf. Argyrou 2002). If we are to take others seriously, instead of reducing their articulations to mere 'cultural perspectives' or 'beliefs' (i.e. 'worldviews'), we can conceive them as enunciations of different 'worlds' or 'natures', without having to concede that this is just shorthand for 'worldviews'.

## Things as meanings：意味としての物

Now, this shift in orientation may have an air of scholastic preciousness about it. Aren't the two options, of rendering difference as a property of representation or of the world, just symmetrical? And isn't the choice between epistemology and ontology merely a matter of vocabulary — a matter of whether one prefers to speak of 'worldviews' or 'worlds'? Ultimately, do these differences about difference really make any difference? They do, because the apparent symmetry is only grammatical. This becomes clear as soon as one adds a third pair of terms to the equations in question, the traditional corollary of representation versus world, namely the contrast between appearance and reality. In its traditional rendition (representation — appearance, world — reality), it is just this extra implication that makes the power of dualism so pernicious to anthropological thinking. For if cultures render different appearances of reality, it follows that one of them is special and better than all the others, namely the one that best reflects reality. And since science — the search for representations that reflect reality as transparently and faithfully as possible — happens to be a modern Western project, that special culture is, well, ours (cf. Latour 2002).

## What things? / Thing-as-heuristic v. Thing-as-analytic：発見的手法としての物

This implication, of course, lies at the heart of the resilient positivist agenda of a 'social science'. Differences between people's representations can be explained (or even, more evangelically, settled) by appeal to our most privileged representations, whose chief difference from others is that they are true — true, that is, 'to the world'. But a very similar notion underlies the habitual anthropological retort to positivism, namely cultural relativism (cf. Sperber 1985: 38-41; cf. Latour 1993: 103-14). True, relativists will deny that certain representations have a superior claim to reality. If the world can only be apprehended through representations, they will argue, then 'reality' or 'truth' are just properties with which we, representationally invest it. Nature is a mirror, goes the argument, and our sense of its reality is constructed in our own image, just like others construct it in theirs.

## Comparison with Latour：ラトゥールとの比較

Nevertheless, relativists are paradoxically just as inclined as positivists to accord special status to their own representations. Having barred themselves from appealing to 'truth', they appeal instead to what philosophers of social science called 'adequacy' (e.g. Taylor 1971: 4-5). According to this view, since all we have is alternative worldviews, the fantasy of explanation must be replaced by the necessity of interpretation — rendering others' representations in the idiom of our own. While such an image of anthropological work is clearly more pluralistic than positivism (inasmuch as interpretation is a game everyone can play — even scientists), upon close inspection it turns out to be no less universalistic. This is because, as positivists like to tease (e.g. Sperber 1985: 41-9), for the notion of interpretation to get off the ground at all (i.e. for it to avoid the logical pitfall of the cultural agnosticism we call 'ethnocentrism'), relativists must assume that their representations, though partial, are nevertheless adequate in principle to the task of translating the nuances of others'. How, logically speaking, can relativists assert without contradiction that our representations are both partial with respect to others' and rich enough to translate them? The answer, anathema to them no doubt, is logically unavoidable. Cross-cultural translation must be mediated by some point of comparison — an element that can be posited, if not as supracultural, then at least as a point of cultural convergence. Enter 'the world', as itchy as a phantom limb following metaphysical amputation. 'They see things differently than we do', relativists say, thereby carting the 'things' of 'the world' back into the picture, against their own better judgement, to guarantee the possibility of adequate cross-cultural translations. It is just for this reason that that perfect Cartesian capsule of a word — world-view — does not strike our otherwise avid anti-Cartesians as oxymoronic. And it is for this reason also that they can be as presumptuous about the merits of their own analytics — their interpretative 'tools' — as positivists are about their 'truths'. Though each of us may talk partially, we all talk about the world, and therefore we can talk about others' versions too.

## From epistemological angst to the ontological turn：認識論的不安から存在論的転回へ

An ontological turn in anthropological analysis refutes these presumptions wholesale. The mysterious-sounding notion of 'many worlds' is so dissimilar to the familiar idea of a plurality of worldviews precisely because it turns on the humble — though on this view logically obvious — admission that our concepts (not our 'representations') must, by definition, be inadequate to translate different ones. This, it is suggested, is the only way to take difference — alterity — seriously as the starting point for anthropological analysis. One must accept that when someone tells us, say, that powder is power, the anthropological problem cannot be that of accounting for why he might think that about powder (explaining, interpreting, placing his statement into context), but rather that if that really is the case, then we just do not know what powder he is talking about. This is an ontological problem through and through. For its answer is patently not to be found by searching 'in the world' — maybe in Cuba? — for some special powerful powder. The world in which powder is power is not an uncharted (and preposterous!) region of our own (cf. Viveiros de Castro 2005; Ardener 1989). It is a different world, in which what we take to be powder is actually power, or, more to the point, a third element which will remain ineffably paradoxical for as long as we insist on glossing it with our own default concepts — neither 'powder' nor 'power' but, somehow, both, or better still, the same thing.

## Two steps to ontological breakthrough：存在論的突破への二段階

So since these 'different worlds' are not to be found in some forgotten corner of our own, then where are they? The answer to this question, which goes to the heart of the method of 'thinking through things', involves two parts — two steps to ontological breakthrough, as it were. In order to understand the first step, consider what the epistemologically informed reaction to the question would look like. Since different worlds are not parts of the world, then they must somehow be a function of our representations — what else? Now, obviously such a reply is no more than a throwback to epistemological orthodoxy (one world, many worldviews). But what it serves to illustrate in its seeming inevitability, is that the logical consequences of the notion of 'different worlds' go deeper than just inverting the familiar formula of 'difference is to similarity what representation is to the world'. For as long as our ordinary intuitions as to what 'the world' is remain untutored, the notion of 'different worlds' will remain contradictory (surely such worlds can only be imagined — i.e. represented — because part of the very definition of the world is that it is single). Thus, for the notion of 'different worlds' to make any sense at all it must be understood without recourse to its putative opposite, that is, different representations. Indeed, the difficulty of this notion — as well as its logical coherence — lies precisely in the fact that it denies the opposition of representation v. world altogether, rather than merely inverting its implications.

It is for this reason, for example, that the claim that when Cuban diviners say that powder is power they are speaking of a different powder (and a different power also) is not a 'constructivist' claim (cf. Latour 1999: 21-3). To put it in Foucauldian terms, the point is not that discursive claims (e.g. 'powder is power') order reality in different ways — according to different 'regimes of truth' — but rather that they create new objects (e.g. powerful powder) in the very act of enunciating new concepts (e.g. powerful powder). Though Foucault would say that discourse creates its objects, he still works from the presumption that there is some real-world fodder out there. For example, while a body may not be male or female until a discourse of gender invokes this as an operative distinction, there is still a body to which the discourse refers. By contrast, what is advanced here is, if you like, an entirely different kind of constructivism — a radical constructivism not dissimilar to that envisaged by Deleuze (Deleuze and Guattari 1994: 7, 35-6). Discourse can have effects not because it 'over-determines reality', but because no ontological distinction between 'discourse' and 'reality' pertains in the first place. In other words, concepts can bring about things because concepts and things just are one and the same (one and the same 'thing', we could say — using the term heuristically).

So, in summary, the syllogism is this. We start with the ordinary (representationist/epistemological) assumption that concepts are the site of difference. Then we argue that in order for difference to be taken seriously (as 'alterity'), the assumption that concepts are ontologically distinct from the things to which they are ordinarily said to 'refer' must be discarded. From this it follows that alterity can quite properly be thought of as a property of things — things, that is, which are concepts as much as they appear to us as 'material' or 'physical' entities. Hence the first answer to the incredulous question of where 'different worlds' might be, is here, in front of us, in the things themselves (things like powder or — as we'll see in the contributions to this book — photographs, legal documents, shamanic costumes, cigarettes, and so on). So this is a method of 'back to the things themselves', as the phenomenologists had it, but only with the caveat that this is not because the 'life-world' of our 'experience' of things has priority over a 'theoretical attitude' (Husserl 1970), but precisely because our experience of things, if you will, can be conceptual (see also Holbraad, this volume).

But this immediately provokes another — and surely equally incredulous — question, which precipitates the second step towards locating these seemingly elusive 'different worlds'. If things really are different, as we argue, then why do they seem the same? If 'different worlds' reside in things, so to speak, then how could we have missed them for so long? Why, when we look at Cuban diviners' powders, do we see just that — powder? And what would we have to do to see it as 'powerful powder'? — whatever that might be ... Still, if incredulity finds its credentials in 'common sense', it should be obvious that these questions make no sense for precisely that reason. True, common sense would insist on casting the question of 'different worlds' in terms of the ways in which they may or may not 'appear' to a knowing — or 'seeing' — subject. Such a visualist key, however, may not always be appropriate,