# Thinking Through Things

## Introduction: Thinking Through Things

What would an artefact-oriented anthropology look like if it were not about material culture? And could such a project develop, not as a new sub-genre within the discipline, but as a means of reconfiguring anthropology's analytic methods more generally? These are questions that preoccupy the contributors to this volume, all of whom share common concerns about the place of objects and materiality in their analytical strategies. Living in places where powder is power, where costumes allow access to other planes of existence, and where legal documents may not primarily concern reason or argument, ethnographers are obliged to question the assumptions underpinning their own surprise at such things. Rather than dismiss informants' accounts as imaginative 'interpretations'—elaborate metaphorical accounts of a 'reality' that is already given—anthropologists might instead seize on these engagements as opportunities from which novel theoretical understandings can emerge. 

The goal of this volume is to gather a range of approaches that show how such moments of ethnographic 'revelation'—in which unanticipated, previously inconceivable things become apparent—may be taken seriously in anthropological discourse. In particular, how and to what degree might the artefacts that so often occasion these moments be engaged with on their own terms? Too often, perhaps, the anthropologist's immediate reaction is to explain away their own surprise with recourse to more familiar conceptions—not least the presupposition that these artefacts are analytically separable from the significance informants seem to 'attach' to them. What would happen, we ask, if this wonderment were held in a state of suspension so as to resist the urge to explain it away? The idea is to develop a language for writing and speaking about ethnographic experience that unsettles distinctions central to the very origins of the discipline, the tools which underpin the work of anthropological explanation.

At least since W. H. R. Rivers declared in 1914 that 'the whole movement of interest' in anthropology is 'away from the physical and material towards the psychological and social', anthropologists, even while working to undermine such distinctions, have tended ultimately to reiterate them. Oppositions between the concrete and the abstract, the physical and the mental, the material and the social have thus endured, becoming hegemonic in the strict sense, in that efforts to overcome them have often contributed to their reproduction (cf. Argyrou 2002: 2–6). Even scholars dedicated to re-integrating materiality and culture in response to the Riversian (and earlier Cartesian) segregation continue to struggle with theoretical languages that presume an a priori distinction between persons and things, matter and meaning, representation and reality. Like the modish notion of 'hybridity', the impetus toward reconnection turns on the presumption of an initial separation.

Such presumptions are, of course, what many working in the field of material culture studies have attempted to overcome by employing theoretical strategies as diverse as phenomenology, cognitive psychology and Marxist analyses of fetishism (see e.g. Ingold 2000; Kuchler 2005; Spyer 1998). By positing the relationship between human subjects and the objects they create as mutually constitutive, for example, scholars like Daniel Miller have sought to retrain anthropology's analytic gaze away from an exclusive focus on the social, toward the materiality of social life (Miller 1987; 2005a). The focus of this book, by contrast, cuts a rather different tranche through the philosophical territory approached by such analyses. Being concerned less with the ways in which subjects and objects emerge, or with questions of materiality, it turns attention rather to the relationship between concepts and things in a way that questions whether these ought necessarily be considered as distinct in the first place. 

The distinction between concepts and things (which broadly compasses other familiar dichotomies such as sense versus reference, signified versus signifier, etc.) may be unhelpful, obscuring theoretical possibilities that might arise were the pre-emption of such contrasts by the artefacts we study taken seriously. By confirming the authority of formulations peculiar to Euro-American philosophical traditions, recourse to familiar analytical concepts can inhibit effective engagement between researchers and the phenomena they study.

The purpose of this introduction is to elucidate what the editors see as implicit in the contributions to this volume. While the contributors were not asked to write to a specific remit, we see in their papers a variety of attempts to sidestep habitual analytic distinctions. Instead of advancing yet more complex and ostensibly sophisticated theoretical models (piling up the assumptions as it were), each explores the peculiar mileage afforded by the ethnographic method itself. What they offer collectively is the promise of a new way of approaching the often-segregated tasks of fieldwork and analysis; in short, the germ of a new methodology. With purposeful naivete, the aim of this method is to take 'things' encountered in the field as they present themselves, rather than immediately assuming that they signify, represent, or stand for something else. Adopting an approach that might be called 'radically essentialist' (see below), the papers that have been assembled here can be seen as exploring a more open, heuristic approach to analysis that allows 'things', as and when they arise, to offer theoretical possibilities (and it will presently be explained why the term 'things' is considered apposite in this context).

## Things as meanings