# Thinking Through Things

## INTRODUCTION: Thinking Through Things

## Things as meanings

## What things? / Thing-as-heuristic v. Thing-as-analytic

The advantage of 'things' as a term is that, unlike 'objects', 'artefacts' and 'materiality', they carry minimal theoretical baggage. The term is, as Levi-Strauss' point about *truc* and *machin* as 'floating signifiers' would suggest, distinguished by its peculiar vacuity (Levi-Strauss 1987: 55, and see Holbraad, this volume) - though we would of course retort that even calling the term 'thing' a 'signifier', floating or otherwise, freights it with particular theoretical weight. The denuded usage of 'things' put forward in this volume is thus intended to signal a shift in the term's status - described here as a transformation of 'thing-as-analytic' to 'thing-as-heuristic'. Rather than going into the field armed with a set of pre-determined theoretical criteria against which to measure the 'things' one already anticipates might be encountered, it is proposed that the 'things' that present themselves be allowed to serve as a heuristic with which a particular field of phenomena can be identified, which only then engender theory. So, the difference between an analytic and a heuristic use of the term 'things' is that while the former implies a classificatory repertoire intended for refinement and expansion, the latter serves to carve out things (as an appropriately empty synonym for 'objects' or 'artefacts') as the field from which such repertoires might emerge. Analytics parse, heuristics merely locate.

Take Holbraad's contribution as an example. The thing through which he sets out to think is aché, a particular kind of powder Cuban diviners use during their seances. This powder, the diviners say, constitutes their divinatory power. Now, if one were to take this powder as a 'thing' in the analytic sense, the ethnographer would have to devise a connection between two distinct entities (powder and power), only one of which appears as 'obviously' thing-like, according to their pre-conceived notion of 'things'. The task then becomes one of interpretation - explaining to those who have not encountered such a 'thing' before how it can be considered powerful (given that the 'things' we know do not exercise power in and of themselves) and how power itself may be considered a (powdery) thing - a strategy which not only presumes the reader's familiarity with the concepts being deployed, but insists upon their authority as an accurate account of reality. 'They' believe the powder is power, 'we' know that this belief derives from a peculiar cultural logic in which powerful powder makes sense. What remains undeveloped (or even precluded) in this scheme are the theoretical possibilities afforded by powerful powder itself. Where one recognises the 'thing-ness' of powder in heuristic terms, on the other hand, the connection with power is already immanent in the powder (the thing is both powder and power and is accepted as such). The task for the ethnographer, then, is not to explain how certain people might counterintuitively connect powder with power, contrary to his own presumption that only one of them (powder) can properly be considered a thing. After all, his informants attest that this powder does not just happen to be powerful, but is power. This begs the question of how an adequate account of this 'thing' can be achieved. Instead of seeing this as a problem of interpretation, that is, of expanding familiar categories to illuminate unfamiliar instances, we suggest that it might rather be treated as one of assembling a satisfactory description - if it seems odd that powder should be power, the problem is 'ours' and not 'theirs'. But crucially, such a task involves a further move. Having accepted powder as power, and allowed others to approach its unfamiliar contours through skilful description, the ethnographer is then obliged to deal with the theoretical implications of this heuristic engagement. One possibility, undertaken here, is to use the ethnographic analysis of powder as an occasion to advance a theory that refuses the dichotomy between materiality and power in the first place. The scheme of classification appropriate to the analysis of powder is thus no longer a pre-condition of the analytical strategy, but its product.

So in summary, behind the hope that an ethnography of things may lead to a revision of our analytical assumptions about what counts as a 'thing' lies the possibility that those assumptions may be inappropriate, and that other people's understandings on this score (including not just their ideas about things but also their assumptions) might be different from what we take to be our own when writing anthropologically. The heuristic approach advocated here seeks to animate these possibilities.

## Comparison with Latour

A heuristic use of the term 'thing' has also been adopted by Bruno Latour, who, after Heidegger, has worked to transform the semantic emphasis of 'things' from 'matters of fact' to what he describes as 'matters of concern' (2004a). Drawing on older etymologies in which 'thing' denoted a gathering place, a space for discussion and negotiation, Latour has rehabilitated this sense of the term as a way out of the twin culs-de-sac of constructivism and objectivity. His argument that we have never been modern turns on his excavation of a dual separation, whereby modernism is only able to purify (i.e. separate) objects from subjects, non-humans from humans, by denying the proliferation of what he calls 'hybrids' or 'quasi-objects' - things that are simultaneously natural and cultural, subject and object, ideal and material. The point is that one cannot 'purify' - or separate non-human from human - without simultaneously creating more hybrids. These hybrids are constituted in the living fabric of a world that is not just mentally constituted or physically given, but both of those things and more. Their resistance to being teased out into ontologically 'acceptable' categories actually provides the very conditions of possibility for the attempts to segregate persons and things which characterise modernism (why would purification be necessary if there was no contamination in the first place?). So Latour has exposed the lie of our modernist leanings, and in so doing has offered a new ontology, which he would claim universally, irrespective of time or place. Our presumed ontological bearings have proved inadequate in his terms, but he has given us new ones to think through.

Where the approach of this volume differs from Latour's work is in the status accorded to the new and more 'democratic' world that emerges from his heuristic usage of 'things'. While our goals may appear comparatively modest in contrast with his re-writing of the Euro-American ontological 'constitution' based on what he has called a 'parliament of things' (2004b), our methodological bent holds out a very different promise. For at the end of the day, Latour offers a new meta-theory whereby the inclusion of non-human/human hybrids portrays everything as a network of entities that breach the object/subject divide. We want to propose a methodology where the 'things' themselves may dictate a plurality of ontologies. Where he presents us with a unifying, revisionist theory of things, we advocate a methodology that might generate a multiplicity of theories. It may be the case that not everything works like a network of hybrids.

So the distinction between 'things-as-analytics' versus 'things-as-heuristics' points toward the absolute productivity of non-definition - towards a new impulse within anthropology to move beyond the development of ever more nuanced filters through which to pass phenomena, through to engagements with things as conduits for concept production. Neither definition nor negative definition will suffice. To speak of absolute productivity in this sense is to suggest an openness of method that treating things as meanings dictates, contrasted here with the strategic foreclosures of elevating this principle to the level of a theoretical dictum.

## From epistemological angst to the ontological turn

## Two steps to ontological breakthrough

## Precedents in Maussian anthropology

## Case Studies

## Conclusion: Thinking Through Things as a Methodology